 The brief facts as set out in the Complaint are that the representatives of the Developer approached the Complainant and persuaded him to book a flat in their project “Crescent ParC” at Village Wazirpur and Mewka  in Sector 92  Gurgaon  by promising various amenities like  green area  clean environment  shopping arcade  school  club house  medical facilities  ample water supply  basement open parking  24 hour security  power backup and landscaped greens  club swimming pools  dining lounge  banquet hall  lawn  cafeteria  gym  squash court  library  restrobar  lawn tennis court  amphitheater etc. It was also assured that after the completion of construction  possession would be delivered within 36 months. Lured by these assurances and promises made  the Complainant has booked a Flat for residential purpose on 19.07.2012 by paying a booking amount of 8 72 933  . The Developer issued the Provisional Allotment Letter dated 03.08.2012 to the Complainant  whereby the Complainant was allotted Flat No. P051003  
10 th Floor  Tower No. P05  “the Petioles” Block admeasuring 2226 sq  ft. 
 The Flat Buyer’s Agreement was executed between the Developer and the Complainant on 19.09.2012 and as per Clause 3.3 of the Agreement  the possession of the unit was to be delivered within 36 months from the date of commencement of construction with an additional period of 6 months as grace period. The basic price of the unit as per the Payment Plan of the Agreement was 99 84 540    including car parking charges  EDC IDC  Club membership  FFC Power backup  EEC and PLC but excluding taxes. The Complainant averred that some of the clauses are totally unreasonable and one sided and arbitrary. It is pleaded that as per Clause 3.3 of the Flat Buyer’s Agreement  in case the Developer was not able to hand over the possession to the Complainant within the stipulated period  the Developer was liable to pay compensation  at the rate of 5  per sq  ft  for the period of delay  but  as per clause 2.3 of the Flat Buyer’s Agreement  if there was any delay in payment of any amount due to the Allottees  the Developer would charge interest   18  p.a. 
 It is averred that the Complainant made all the payments s as and when demanded by the Developer and by 14.07.2017 the Complainant had paid an amount of 1 00 27 018  . It is pleaded that the Complainant has availed a loan from ICICI Bank on 24.11.2012 to make the payments of the demands made by the Developer. Later the Home Loan was transferred to State Bank of India and the Complainant is paying regular EMIs for the same. 
 It is averred that the construction of the project was started on 29.10.2012 as can be seen from the Account Statement dated 28.02.2018  therefore  the possession of the Agreement was to be offered by 29.04.2016  including the grace period. It is further averred that despite having paid substantial amounts by the Complainant the Developer failed to deliver the possession of the Flat on time i.e  by 29.04.2016 and the Complainant had to live in a rented accommodation as he had booked the subject flat for residential purpose of his family. 
 It is averred that the Developer has miserably failed to comply with the contractual obligations of handing over possession of the subject Flat  and did not complete the construction work  which amounts to “deficiency of service” on the part of the Developer and as the Complainant has suffered a lot of mental agony and financial strain at the hands of the Developer  he is entitled to be adequately compensated. 
 It is pleaded that as per clause 2.3 of the Agreement the Developer was liable to charge interest   18  p.a  in case of any delay in payment of demands. Therefore applying the same parity  the Developer is also liable to pay the same interest rate i.e  18  p.a  on the amount deposited. Hence  the Complainant approached this Commission seeking the aforenoted reliefs. 
 The Developer filed its reply admitting to the booking of a Flat  the Allotment Letter and the execution of the Flat Buyer’s Agreements dated 19.09.2 It is averred that as per Clause 3.3 of the Flat Buyer’s Agreements  possession is to be handed over within 36 months from the date of commencement of construction with an extension of 6 months. It is admitted that the construction began in October  2 It is averred that in terms of Clause 22.2 of the Flat Buyer’s Agreement this Commission has no jurisdiction to entertain the instant Complaint as the said clause specifies that the courts at Gurgaon and the High Court of Punjab and Haryana at Chandigarh alone shall have jurisdiction in all matters arising out of the Flat Buyer’s Agreement dated 19.09.2012  that the Complainant is not a “Consumer” as defined under Section 2  1   d  of the Act as he has not booked the subject Flat for self use or for use of his family but for commercial  resale purpose with a view to reap benefits from the appreciation. It is denied that the Complainant is residing in a rented accommodation. It is averred that the Complainant has a permanent residence at Vikaspuri  New Delhi and he has filed a fabricated Rent Agreement. It is further stated that the Complainant has signed the Agreement after fully analyzing the terms of the Agreement and both the parties are bound by the terms and now cannot demand refund of the amount paid with interest and compensation. All the other averments made in the Complaint were denied and the Developer seeks dismissal of the Complaint with costs. 
 The Complainant filed his Affidavit by way of Evidence and marked Exhibit CW1 1   copy of the detail about the Opposite Party   CW1 2  Copy of the Allotment Letter   CW1 3  Copy of the Flat Buyer’s Agreement   CW1 4  Copies of the Rent Agreements dated 08.03.2016 and 06.11.2017   CW1 5  Copy of the payment schedule dated 13.04.2018 issued by ICICI Bank   CW1 6  Copy of the Statement of Account issued by the State Bank of India  and CW1 7  Copy of the Account Statement Cum Tax Invoice  on his behalf. 
 The Developer filed its Affidavit by way of Evidence and marked Annexure   OP 1  copy of the Application Form   Annexure   OP 2  copy of the Allotment Letter   Annexure   OP 3  copy of the Flat Buyer’s Agreement   Annexure   OP 4  Copies of the reminders dated 21.11.2012 and 03.12.2012 issued by the Developer   Annexure   OP 5  copy of the order dated 31.07.2012 passed by the Punjab   Haryana High Court   Annexure   OP 6  copy of the judgement dated 27.02.2012 passed by the Hon’ble Supreme Court   Annexure   OP 7  copy of the Occupation Certificate issued for Tower Nos. T1 to T5  and Annexure   OP 8 and 9  copy of the Application Form for issuance for Occupancy Certificate  on their behalf. 
	 Heard counsel for both sides at length.  
	 The facts not in dispute are that the Complainant paid an amount of 1 00 27 018   towards  
allotted Flat No. P051003  10 th Floor  Tower No. P05  “the Petioles” Block admeasuring 2226 sq  ft  in the Project “Crescent ParC” at Village Wazirpur and Mewka  in Sector 92  Gurgaon  that the Complainant obtained a Home Loan  that as per Clause 3.3 the possession was to be offered within 36 months from the date of commencement of construction plus six months grace period and that the construction was started in October 2 Clause 3.3 of the Agreement reads as follows  
“ The Company shall endeavor to offer possession of the Said Flat within a period of thirty six  36  months from the date of commencement of construction and subject to timely payment by the Allottee towards the basic sale price and other charges  as demanded in terms of this Agreement. The time frame for possession provided hereinabove is tentative and shall be subject to force majeure and timely and prompt payment of all installments and completion of formalities required and the timely receipt of all approvals from the concerned authorities. The Company shall be entitled to six  6  months additional period in the event there is a delay in handing over possession. However  in case of delay beyond a period of six  6  months and such delay is attributable to the Company  the Company shall be liable to pay compensation   Rs  5.00   Rs. Five  per sq  ft  per month of the Super Area of the Said Flat for the period of further delay.” 
 Emphasis supplied  
 The contention of the learned Counsel for the Developer that the Complainant is not a ‘Consumer’ as he has purchased the said unit for commercial purpose is not substantiated by any documentary evidence and is completely unsustainable in the light of the judgement of this Commission in Kavita Ahuja vs. Shipra Estates I  2016  CPJ 31  NC   wherein this Commission has laid down the principle that the onus of establishing that the Complainant was dealing in real estate is on the Opposite Parties  which in the instant case they have failed to discharge or file any documentary evidence to establish that the Complainant is an ‘Investor’ and not a ‘Consumer’  therefore we are of the considered view that the Complainant is a ‘Consumer’ as defined under Section 2  1  d  of the Act. 
 Learned Counsel appearing for the Developer vehemently argued that Clause 3.3 specifies that the delivery of possession is subject to force majeure conditions and that there were several reasons and circumstances beyond the control of the Developer such as interim orders of the Hon’ble Punjab and Haryana High Court  whereby ground water extraction was banned in Gurgaon and there was shortage of construction material and labour. All these aforenoted reasons do not fall within the ambit of reasons beyond their control and cannot be construed to be any substantial reason and definitely not a force majeure condition. 
 Learned Counsel for the Developer at the time of final hearing informed the Bench that the Developer has applied for an Occupation Certificate on 18.01.2019 and in all likelihood the possession of the unit would be handed over in a short period of time after obtaining the Occupation Certificate. Even in their Written Version there is no specific date given for the handing over of possession of the subject flats. Taking into consideration the fact that the time for completion of construction ended in April  2016 and that the Developer admitted in the Written Version that the construction started in October  2012  and further that the Developer is unable to give any specified date by which time they can handover the legal possession with the Occupation Certificate  we are of the view that the decision of the Hon’ble Supreme Court in Kolkata West International City Pvt. Ltd. Vs. Devasis Rudra  II  2019  CPJ 29  SC   wherein the Hon’ble Apex Court has laid down that the flat purchaser cannot be made to wait indefinitely for delivery of possession  squarely applies to the facts of this case. 
 The contention of the learned Counsel for Developer that as per Clause 22.2 of the Flat Buyer’s Agreement this Commission has no jurisdiction to entertain the instant Complaint is untenable as this Commission has the jurisdiction to entertain the Complaint as the amount  involved exceeds one crore. Section 3 of the Act specifies that the provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of the provisions of any other law for the time being in force. 
 We find force in the contention of the learned Counsel for the Complainants that some of the Clauses of the Flat Buyer’s Agreement are one sided and arbitrary. It is seen from the record that Clause 3.3 of the Agreement refers to the compensation to be paid by the Developer at 5   per sq  ft  per month on the super area for any delay in offering possession of the Flat. These charges are further to be paid only after the stipulated period of 36 months plus grace period has lapsed. Learned Counsel for the Complainant argued that this meagre sum of 5   per sq  ft  for every month of delay amounts to approximately 1.3  rate of interest per annum  whereas the Developer as per Clause 2.3 is charging interest   18  p.a  on any amounts delayed but due and payable by the purchasers. At this juncture  we find it a fit case to place reliance on the principle laid down by the Hon’ble Supreme Court in Pioneer Urban Land   Infrastructure Ltd. Vs. Govindan Raghavan  II  2009  CPJ 34  SC    wherein the Hon’ble Apex Court had examined such Clauses present in the Builder Buyer Agreements and has observed that such one sided Clauses amount to unfair trade practice. Having regard to the the facts and circumstances of the case we have no hesitation to hold that Clause 2.3 and 3.3 of the subject Flat Buyer’s Agreement falls within the definition of unfair trade practice as defined under Section 2  r  of the Act. 
 Keeping in view the aforenoted reasons  we are of the considered opinion that there is deficiency of service on behalf of the Developer and the Complainant is entitled for refund of the amount paid with interest   12  p.a  and costs of 25 000  . It is relevant to note that this interest   12  p.a  is being awarded to meet the ends of justice specially keeping in view the submission of the learned Counsel appearing for the Complainant that the Complainant has obtained a housing loan and is paying EMIs with interest   10.5  to 10.75  to ICICI Bank and thereafter   8.5  to SBI  the Complainant has to live in a rented accommodation due to failure of delivery of possession within the stipulated time  the loss of opportunity of the Complainant as had the Complainant invested the same amount of money elsewhere or if he had purchased the house in another project  he would have had a better opportunity of exercising his options and could fulfil his dream of owning a house and finally taking into consideration the principal of restitutio in integrum which specifies that the aggrieved person should necessarily be compensated for the financial loss suffered due to the event and get that sum of money which would put him in the same position as he would have been if he had not sustained the wrong. Hence  we are of the view that awarding interest   12  p.a  is not only reasonable but also justified. It is pertinent to mention that no additional amounts are being awarded under the head of ‘Compensation’ as this interest rate   12  p.a  is being awarded by way of damages and compensation. We rely on the recent judgement of the Hon’ble Supreme Court in DLF Homes Panchkula Pvt. Ltd Vs. D.S. Dhanda   II  2019  CPJ 117  SC    wherein it is observed that when interest is awarded by way of damages awarding additional compensation is unjustified. 
 In the result  this Complaint is allowed in part directing the Developer to refund the principal amount with interest   12  p.a  from the respective dates of deposit till the date of realisation together with costs of 25 000  . This amount is directed to be paid within four weeks from the date of receipt of a copy of this order  failing which  the amount shall attract interest   14  p.a  for the same period. 
