

      Pursuant to the Allotment Letter  a Tripartite Agreement was entered into between the Opposite Party  the Complainants and the HDFC Ltd  wherein the Opposite Party made a commitment to pay interest to the HDFC Ltd  till December 2016. 



 i       to complete the Project expeditiously  complete in all respects  and to obtain Competition Certificate from the Competent Authority as well as to execute the conveyance deed and hand over vacant and peaceful possession to the Complainants within such period as may be fixed by this Hon’ble Commission 



 iv     to pay damages to the Complainants to the tune of Rs50 00 000   for mental agony and harassment 

 v      to pay further interest  15  p.a  on the amounts calculated under prayer  iii  and  iv   in case of non compliance of the said prayers within the time frame fixed by this Hon’ble Commission  till the date of actual payment realization  or  in the alternative 

 i       to refund to the Complainants the amount of Rs2 96 89 370   together with pendente lite and future interest  18  per annum from the date of respective payments till the date of actual payment or realization thereof and

 ii      costs of the present Complaint be awarded in favour of Complainants and against the Opposite Party.






 

    As part of its contentions made in the Written Version the Opposite Party submitted that the relief claimed in the Complaint cannot be entertained inasmuch as the relief seeking interest  18  is contrary to the terms of the allotment duly agreed between the parties. The delay in possession is duly envisaged by the Allotment Letter and the same entails compensation  Rs5   per sq  ft..  The Complaint is liable to be dismissed inasmuch as the relief claimed in the Complaint cannot be granted.

    The Complainants filed their Rejoinder  denied all the rival contentions advanced by the Opposite Party in their Written Version and reiterated the averments made in the Complaint.


    I have heard the parties’ counsel at length  perused the material on record as well as the Written Submissions filed by the parties’ counsel.




    I have given my thoughtful consideration to the issue at hand. In brief  it is the Complainants’ case that despite paying an amount of Rs2 96 89 370   out of the total sale consideration of Rs3 30 65 800   for Flat No.E 1510 on 14th Floor  in Tower E of the Project  the Opposite Party did not complete the construction nor offered possession within the stipulated time period i.e  by December  2016 and not even paid any amount towards delayed delivery.  




    In my considered view  not bringing the material facts and consequences relating to availability of land  acquisition of land  and approvals from the concerned authorities at the due time to the notice of the Complainants while entering into a transaction with the Complainants are unfair and deceptive practices on the part of the Opposite Party within the meaning of Section 2 1  r  of the Consumer Protection Act  1986.

    Be that as it may  though the Opposite Party is still ready and willing to hand over the possession of the allotted flat to the Complainants  a valuable right has arisen in favour of the Complainants by efflux of time and due to failure of the Opposite Party to give possession for about three years from the stipulated date of possession  to take possession of the subject flat at this belated stage or to seek refund of the entire amount deposited with reasonable compensation. In Emmar MGF Land Ltd   Ors  vs. Amit Puri   II  2015  CPJ 568 NC   this Commission has held that after the promised date of delivery  it is the discretion of the Complainant whether he wants to accept the offer of possession  if any  or seek refund of the amounts paid with reasonable interest. I am of the view that the Complainants cannot be made to wait indefinitely for the delivery of the possession when they had already paid almost the entire consideration. In such circumstances  it is well within the Complainant’s right to seek for refund of the principal amount with interest and compensation.

    The Learned Counsel for the Complainants has submitted that the Complainants are not interested to take possession of the subject flat due to delay of about three years in delivering the possession. Therefore  they have sought the refund of the amount paid along with interest and compensation.

    The last contention argued by the Learned Counsel for the Opposite Party is that the relief sought for refund with interest  18  p.a  is contrary to the terms of the Allotment Letter and is in a way of re writing the terms of the allotment which is not permissible  more so  when the Complainant neither disputed the terms of allotment nor challenged them in any of the reliefs. It is also submitted by the Learned Counsel that the Opposite Party has contributed an amount of Rs36 32 297   towards the EMIs for 24 months out of the entire sale consideration paid i.e. Rs2 96 89 370   and the Complainants cannot enrich themselves by claiming interest on the total amount of Rs2 96 89 370  .

    The aforesaid contention  in my view  does not really arise for consideration in this case. The primary purpose of a Consumer in booking a residential Flat which the Builder is to construct for him  is to start living in that house on or about the date committed to him by the Builder for delivering possession of the Flat booked by him. If the Builder fails to comply with the contractual obligation and at the same time  is unable to show that the delay in completion of the Flat and offering its possession to the Consumer is on account of circumstances beyond his control  this would constitute deficiency on the part of the Builder Service Provider in rendering services to the Consumer. If I accept the contention that the Builder can indefinitely postpone and delay the construction of the Flat and the Flat Buyer has no option but to wait till the Builder decides to complete the construction and offer possession to the Buyer  that would be nothing but a travesty of justice and result in a situation where the Flat Buyer is left at the mercy of the Builder  without recourse to an appropriate legal remedy. Such an interpretation  if taken  is bound to defeat the very objective behind the enactment of the Consumer Protection Act  as far as housing construction is concerned. Therefore  I am unable to accept the contention advanced by the learned Counsel for the Opposite Party. In my view  wherever the Builder commits a particular date or time frame for completion of the construction and offering possession to the Buyer  they must necessarily honour the commitment made by them  though a minor delay may not constitute deficiency in the service rendered by them to the Buyer. Of course  if the Builder is able to show that the delay in completion of the construction and offering possession to the Buyer is attributable wholly to the circumstances beyond its control  that may not be a case of deficiency in the services rendered to the Consumer.

    At this juncture  I find it a fit case to place reliance on the recent judgment of the Hon’ble Apex Court in Pioneer Urban Land   Infrastructure Ltd. Vs. Govindan Raghavan   II  2009  CPJ 34  SC   wherein the Apex Court has observed as follows 

“6.7.   A terms of a contract will not be final and binding if it is shown that the flat purchasers had no option but to sign on the dotted line  on a contract framed by the builder. The contractual terms of the Agreement dated 08.05.2012 are ex facie one sided  unfair and unreasonable. The incorporation of such one sided clauses in an agreement constitutes an unfair trade practice as per Section 2 r  of the Consumer Protection Act  1986 since it adopts unfair methods or practices for the purpose of selling the flats by the Builder.

          7.       In view of the above discussion  we have no hesitation in holding that the terms of the Apartment Buyer’s Agreement dated 08.05.2012 were wholly one sided and unfair to the Respondent Flat Purchaser. The Appellant Builder cannot seek to bind the Respondent with such one sided contractual terms.”

    I further place reliance on the judgment of the Hon’ble Supreme Court in Kolkata West International City Pvt. Ltd. Vs. Devasis Rudra   II  2019  CPJ 29 SC   in which the Hon’ble Apex Court has observed as hereunder  

          “.....It would be manifestly unreasonable to construe the contract between the parties as requiring the buyer to wait indefinitely for possession. By 2016  nearly seven years had elapsed from the date of the agreement. Even according to the developer  the completion certificate was received on 29 March 2016. This was nearly seven years after the extended date for the handing over of possession prescribed by the agreement. A buyer can be expected to wait for possession for a reasonable period. A period of seven years in beyond what is reasonable. Hence  it would have been manifestly unfair to non suit the buyer merely on the basis of the first prayer in the reliefs sought before the SCDRC. There was in any event a prayer for refund.

         In the circumstances  we are of the view that the orders passed by the SCDRC and by the NCDRC for refund of moneys were justified.”

    In the instant case also the Complainants cannot be made to wait indefinitely as the possession of the flat has not been handed over to them so far and the Opposite Party is enjoying the benefits of their hard earning money deposited with it. Therefore  the Complainants are also entitled for refund of the principal amount with reasonable interest and compensation.


 i       the Opposite Party shall refund the entire amount deposited by the Complainants along with interest   12  p.a  from the respective dates of deposits till the date of realisation  within a period of one month from today failing which the Opposite Party shall be liable to pay interest   14  p.a.. The interest   12  p.a  has been directed to be paid for the reason that the Complainants have taken home loans from the Banks Financial Institutions for making payment to the Builder Opposite Party for purchasing the Flats Apartments in question 

 ii      the Opposite Party shall also pay Rs10 000   as costs of litigation to the Complainants.

    Before parting  I may make it clear that the interest  12  p.a  on the refund of the amount which has been awarded as compensation is not factually interest on refund and  therefore  there is no question of deducting any tax on source.

 
......................J
R.K. AGRAWAL
PRESIDENT